this is a talk called fire and ice that
volcanic worlds of the solar system and
it's one of a series of talks that I put
together and have given a number of
times on cruise ships all around the
world very much aimed at the beginner
level and no complicated science in this
at all it's a talk based on astronomy
but of course we're going to talk about
volcanoes and so we're going to start
with a little bit of geology if I said
the word volcano then this is perhaps
what you would immediately conjure up in
your mind a cone-shaped mountain with
fire bursting out of the top and molten
lava molten rock running down the
outside of the shape slopes of the
mountain a picture of a classic fire
fountain volcano this one taken in
Iceland and you've got huge eruption
going on molten lava molten rock being
thrown high into the sky and a few
fumaroles which are little steam vents
coming up at the sides of the volcano as
well there but of course what's being
happening underneath we have a magma
chamber which is molten rock we call
molten rock magma when it's underneath
the ground and when it bursts through to
the surface we call it lava but it still
still the same thing so that molten rock
floods up into the magma chamber from
deep in the core of the earth very high
temperature and eventually finds her way
through a crack in the ground up to the
surface and bursts out and we call it
lava and it flows down the sides and
each eruption makes the cone-shaped
volcano get taller and taller as the
mountain builds up and the lava turns
back into solid rock when it cools down
all volcanoes look like that here is a
picture taken from space from orbit
looking down on some mountains in Asia
and they're cone-shaped game classic
volcano shaped Mountain
but this one's erupting and it's not
producing large amounts of red hot lava
instead you can see a huge plume of ash
rising high from the top of the mountain
up into the stratosphere it's gray
superheated ash mixed with steam is
rising out to the top of the volcano a
rather different looking eruption so
what's going on well we find the
volcanoes in particular places on earth
and this picture here shows a very good
illustration of that it's called the
Ring of Fire
every little red triangle is an place
where we find a volcano and you can see
they ring the outer edges of the Pacific
all down the coast of the Americas there
and all around Asia and down past
Australia all around the Pacific Ocean
and these are where we find generally
speaking the ash type volcanoes but
there are some oddball cases in the
center of the Pacific there we have the
Hawaiian Islands and these tend to be
the lava
emitting fire fountain volcanoes we call
these hotspot volcanoes and we'll
explain the difference for the Asheville
knose that ring the Pacific Ring of Fire
they're on the boundary between the
continents and the oceans the Earth's
surface is divided into these great
plates some of them are ocean plates and
some of them are continent carrying
plates the continents when they bash up
against and crash into the ocean plates
which are moving around the earth
jiggling about it causes these great
collisions but because the continents
are less dense than the ocean plates the
rock in the ocean plates is saturated
with water so every last nook and cranny
is filled so they're more dense in fact
than the continents the continents
therefore tend to float up
over the top of them and the ocean crush
crust gets pushed down in a process that
we call subduction subducted down
underneath into the core of the earth
into the layer of magma and is melted
and as it's melted by the immense heat
deep in the earth all of that water that
was trapped in the ocean boils as
superheated steam and water and finds
its way back up through the continental
crust of the overlying continent along
the edge along the dividing line and
bursts out through cracks forming these
ash volcanoes the reason it creates ash
is because the superheated steam carries
along with it a lot of mineral grains
and dissolved minerals and once the
pressure is released as it bursts out
into the atmosphere that dissolved
mineral gets released as little mineral
grains and forms the enormous cloud of
ash that's projected upwards and if we
look at other of the Atlantic for
example we find what's called a
mid-ocean ridge this is a crack between
two of the ocean plates so the Atlantic
is actually covering the two sides of
two different plates of ocean crust and
they're moving apart from each other
creating this great crack in the ground
where more material is coming up from
deep in the earth and filling in the gap
and forcing the two plates apart and
that gap in the ground comes to the
surface on the island of Iceland you can
actually go and visit the crack in the
ground between the American side and the
European side at the thingvellir
national park they can walk down this
pathway here as a photograph that I took
and have your feet essentially one foot
on the American side one foot on the
European side and this gap in the ground
is getting wider by about three
centimeters every year as material is
forcing its way up from underneath the
animation here that shows a ball of
magma deep in the earth trying to get up
through the surface and the crack
between these two plates is allowing it
to come up and force its way between
them creating more Rock and forcing the
two ocean plates further apart now this
act like a giant conveyor belt and of
course we end up enormous recycling of
the Earth's crust the ocean crust is
being reformed formed in the rising
plume of magma that is at the center of
the mid-atlantic ridges and then the two
plates have pushed apart until they bump
into the continents that's the left and
right there where they're subducted
underneath the continents and re melted
and the material then flows around
through the mantle and comes back up
again a couple of hundred million years
later to reform new ocean plate so in
fact no part of the ocean floor is older
than about 200 to 250 million years
anywhere on the earth whereas the
continents which don't take part in this
recycling are where we find really
ancient rocks dating right the way back
to pretty much the formation of the
planet some four thousand million years
ago
think about the oldest rocks that we
find on the floating continents they're
now in the center of further Pacific
there is also a rising magma plume but
it's coming up right under the middle of
there more or less solid Pacific plate
and it tries to find its way out that
heat forces its way up through cracks
and there's quite a powerful magma plume
coming up underneath the Hawaiian
Islands
which is responsible for forming them
so what happens is I thinking
periodically bursts its way out and has
an enormous eruption and makes a a new
volcanic mountain and if that volcanic
mountain becomes tall enough to clear
the level of the sea from the seafloor
then a new island is formed and if the
eruption keeps having new episodes then
it builds the Mount and higher and
higher and builds a bigger and bigger
island but of course the plate is
butanol and changes its position
carrying those islands away from being
directly above the rising hotspot which
is largely stationary linked deep into
the center of the earth and so next time
it erupts it'll start building a new
mountain a new volcano and a new island
and so when we look at the direction of
the plate movement and we see that it's
lined up with all of the chain of
islands that form the hawaiian island
group and the most active and recently
active volcano is right down at the big
island of hawaii where we find Mauna Kea
and the current eruptions and then the
smaller islands further to the northwest
there our extinct volcanoes they're no
longer above the hotspot and the sea
mounts that are shown right up to the
end there and the oldest of the islands
where erosion has now erased the the
island back underneath the surface of
the sea you can see that the biggest
island is the my youngest and once the
plate moves on that volcano will become
extinct a new island will start to form
at the head of the chain and all of the
others will gradually be eroded back
down and disappear beneath the waves
again it's a fascinating protest so it
all depends on the relative rate of
eruption and the speed with which the
plate moves and those can be very
episodic the plates not in there
constant movement it tends to shift at a
varying speed and of course the
eruptions are rather erratic as well
this all begs the question where does
the heat come from and it dates right
back to the formation of the earth which
of course is where the Astronomy kicked
in so 4,500 million years ago the earth
was formed out of material that was
orbiting around in a huge cloud of gas
and dust and dirty material that was
surrounding the young Sun the Sun formed
at the center of this disk about five
thousand million years ago and gradually
then the leftover material started to
gather under its own gravity in a disc
that was spinning around the outside of
the Sun and probably formed in the inner
part of our solar system around about
200 small baby planetoids or
planetesimals little baby planets and
those baby planets would occasionally
bump into each other and either merge if
that there was a nice gentle close
approach where they were moving in the
same direction and they just nudged up
against each other or if they hit
head-on they would have a cataclysmic
explosion and destroy each other and
scatter their contents back around to
float around in the remaining disk but
eventually things settled down and we of
course live on one of the four surviving
predators of this process that is the
earth the others being Mercury Venus and
Mars that swept up most of the material
little bits of it still fall on the
earth about a hundred tons of space dust
and rock particles falls out of the sky
every day and just makes the earth that
little bit heavier every day and this is
the leftovers of that formation process
but of course this enormous bombardment
of infalling material all carrying a lot
of energy with it when it hits the baby
planet that energy is turned into heat
and so these small forming planets
all been largely balls of molten rock
and the lighter molten layers the
lightweight silicate rock will it float
to the surface and the metals the heavy
metals iron and nickel mostly will sink
to the center being more dense and form
the iron cause of these growing planets
but all of that trapped an enormous
amount of heat in the center of the the
planets and gradually as the bombardment
calmed down as the surviving objects had
managed to sweep up most of the material
the outer layers will get a chance to
cool off being exposed to the cold of
space they could cool a form a crust but
still in the center the material is red
hots was red hot and it still is today
but there is another factor a lot of the
material inside the Earth's core is
still releasing energy today from
radioactive materials like uranium and
thorium even potassium-40 that
contaminates our bananas well you'd have
to eat a million bananas to really do
yourself any harm so don't worry about
it you might have other problems if you
ate a million bananas but anyway the
radioactivity of the early planets would
have been much higher a lot of
short-lived radioactive isotopes who
would have been present releasing their
energy gradually though that decays away
but it generates a lot of heat that's
still trapped in the center of the
planets today still trying to get out
and it's the volcanoes that are trying
to bring that heat to the surface and
allow the heat to escape to space but if
we look at other bodies the question is
do we find volcanoes there well here's a
picture of our Moon and it's of course
the side of the Moon that is termed
permanently towards the earth so it's
the same side that we see all the time
as the Moon moves around it keeps one
face pointing towards the Earth and we
see
on the moon there the dark seas of the
Moon the moir they as the Greeks called
them which translates as seas they
thought they look very smooth and could
possibly be filled with water or some
other liquid and they weren't too far
wrong because those large seas are in
fact pretty much all circular when you
look at them and they really are just
giant craters huge impacts where other
large space rocks hit the moon and
punctured right through into the molten
lava molten magma beneath the surface of
the Moon which flooded to the surface
then because we call it lava and it
would have flooded the resulting
enormous craters and then cooled down
and solidified but that liquid lava is
what's responsible for them having that
rather smooth appearance so the Greeks
weren't entirely wrong we also noticed
that the moir the seas are very dark
that's because material on the surface
of the Moon is constantly exposed to the
solar wind coming from the Sun lots of
radioactive particles stream from the
Sun high-energy protons all sorts of
things and they hit the surface and it
gradually turns material darker so where
we see dark regions on the moon they are
old they've been exposed to the solar
wind for a very long time
the moir were mostly formed around
about 3800 to 4000 million years ago
whereas the other lighter colored
regions are much younger material and in
particular we can see the impact crater
at the bottom there Tycho very bright
that's one of the youngest features on
the moon it's only a hundred and seven
million years old when a space rock
smashed into the surface of the Moon
there and scattered material in every
direction you can see where the material
ejected when almost all right the way
around the moon in some of the rays that
radiates out from it further up towards
the just above the center of the moon
there is a slightly older crater called
Copernicus and you can see it
mostly being a little bit darkened by
that longer exposure of its ejected
material to the solar wind
so it's gradually darkening down so
bright equals young dark equals old on
the surface of the Moon
but all these craters once upon a time
there was a big argument about whether
they were vaak volcanoes or as I've been
saying impact craters we now know that
they're the results of space impacts but
even through into the 1960s Patrick
Moore in his books refused to believe it
he was very much convinced they were all
evidence of volcanoes on the moon who
sees that volcanoes there's a few
cone-shaped mountains in this image of
part of the moon's surface here handily
pointed out by the black arrows you can
see the cone-shaped Hills there that
were volcanoes they're now extinct and
of course you can see some obviously
different looking impact craters next to
them they do look quite different but
this photograph has the advantage you've
been taken by the Lunar Reconnaissance
Orbiter which was orbiting around the
moon only 60 miles above the surface of
the Moon they're so much better
resolution than we could obtain even
with telescopes from the earth now if we
move on from the moon and we look at the
planet Mercury actually looks strikingly
similar in some ways apart from the fact
that we don't have the puncture wounds
that leads to the moir we've got no
huge dark seas on Mercury but we do have
lots and lots of craters covering a gray
surface if I showed you a zoomed in bit
of mercury and a zoomed in bit of the
moon be really quite difficult to tell
the difference there are lots and lots
of impact craters but there are a few
rather old and extinct volcanoes is a of
some volcanoes on Mercury the ones that
the left are much better
sure
really labeled their volcanic deposits
we've got a little heart-shaped volcano
caldera volcanic crater and you can see
where the bright material has recently
in astronomical terms being erupted from
that and deposited on the surface there
and again features on Mercury gradually
go darker due to exposure to the solar
wind it's gets a great deal more solar
wind of course being nearer to the Sun
and so the surface really is quite dark
these pictures have had the brightness
enhanced so we can see what's going on
so we do see evidence of volcano it's
both on Mercury in the moon but they
don't seem to be active today and the
reason is that their cores have cooled
down rather like a child going out on a
walk on a cold day with you if neither
of you have a coach then that child will
get very very cold bursts and start to
lose its core heat and suffer from
exposure so it's a very bad idea you
must make sure if you take a child out
on a cold day it's well wrapped up
because it will get to and feel the cold
much more quickly than you do and that's
because the amount of core heat inside a
small object is much less compared to
its ability to lose heat through its
surface area in mathematical terms the
moon is a quarter of the size of the
earth in terms of diameter it has a
sixteenth of the Earth's surface area
through which it loses heat to space but
only a 64th of the volume must so the
amount of heat contained in that core is
much less compared to the surface area
and so it's able to cool much more
quickly and in fact four times as
quickly and so within about a billion
years the moon's core had more or less
lost all of its heat to space and that
of course resulted in the volcanoes
ceasing to
RuPt Mercury's a little bit bigger it's
intermediate in size between the moon
and the earth probably twice the size of
the moon and so it will have managed to
retain that heat in the core
correspondingly longer and so has had
volcanic activity on it more recently
but it's now pretty much solidified well
let's have a look at the next planet
Venus is the telescopic view that you
get with the best telescopes we have all
I can see is the cloud tops of the
atmosphere Venus is about the same size
as the earth just tiny little bit
smaller but essentially the twin of the
earth in terms of mass and diameter and
so on and so it would have trapped the
same amount of heat inside it when it
formed and we would expect therefore to
see the same volcanic processes but this
thick atmosphere means we just can't see
what's going on beneath it the
atmosphere is a hundred times as dense
as that of our own composed of carbon
dioxide there's all sorts of other
interesting chemicals like battery acid
sulfuric acid which rains out onto the
surface and heavy metals that snow out
onto the mountaintops and really it's
Earth's evil twin the temperature on the
surface
Goodin 60 degrees here's a radar view we
can use radar to penetrate down through
the clouds and see the surface of Venus
and what we are seeing here in the
bright orange are some large impact
craters they don't look quite the same
as impact craters on the earth they look
a bit slumped and the reason is that
surface temperature is making the rock
really quite squidgy it's getting it up
towards its melting point just because
of that four hundred and sixty degree
surface temperature and the effect of
that is that the rock is rather runny
and just doesn't form the nice sharp
crater rims that we see on Mercury or
the moon or craters on the earth
we also don't see any small craters and
the reason is that no small space rock
is going to enter Venus's atmosphere and
do anything other than burn up before it
reaches the ground due to that 100 times
density of the earth atmosphere any any
incoming space rock have any small size
it's going to burn up only the large
ones make it to the ground but what
about volcanoes well here's a marvelous
picture of one of the 16 hundred or so
volcanoes that we see on the surface of
Venus
now we think most of them seem to be
extinct
we're not entirely sure it's a little
difficult to study what's going on again
we're using radar to see through the
clouds here and we can see that this is
a classic Shields type volcano like you
see at Hawaii therefore probably caused
by a hot spot rising up and lots of
molten lava running away down the slope
there the bright material and it's very
very runny of course because of that
high temperature again it looks like
the lava flows a very long way now
because there's no water lying on the
surface of Venus again that incredibly
high temperature prevents there being
any oceans it means that if there ever
were
any plates separating the different
regions of the surface of the crust then
they're all dry and so there's no none
of that difference in density I mean
indeed there's no water to lubricate the
process of one plate subducting
underneath another so we don't see any
of that same process that we see on
earth that leads to the ash type
volcanoes going on you see oh it's these
weird pancake volcanoes we don't really
understand these again they look like
could be lava remains runny due to that
very high surface temperature and that
that could be somehow causing these
weird shaped very slumped volcanoes
Venis rather different in some ways to
what we see on earth what about the next
planet well the picture of Mars and we
got the polar caps at the top the dark
regions gray color and then the orangey
pinky red whatever color you want to
call it look salmon pink for a telescope
to me but it is in fact a sort of rusty
orange color in this photograph of the
rest of the desert regions and then we
have some white markings in the middle
there and those are ice clouds high in
the Martian atmosphere
Mars's atmosphere is about 1% of that of
the Earth's so Venus is a hundred times
more than we on earth Mars a hundred
times less but it's enough to support
ice clouds high in the Fiat atmosphere
there and some of them are forming over
the top of the tallest mountains and the
tallest mountains on Mars are in fact
volcanoes if we zoom in on that sort of
left-hand equatorial region of the
planet we see a row of volcanoes and one
large one off to the side there this is
the highland region called the Tharsis
plateau and we see three big volcanoes
in a nice straight line there with
different sized calderas a few smaller
volcanoes one or two impact craters and
up at the top left there we see Olympus
Mons the largest volcano on Mars in fact
it's the largest volcano in the solar
system and it's a Hawaiian type shield
hot spot volcano being built up over
many many eruptions over millions of
years getting taller and taller as if
the hot spot had stayed in the same
place underneath that are building one
enormous volcano over time and we think
what might have happened is that the hot
spot built those three that we're in a
line as the surface of Mars was moving
over the top of the hot spots just in
same way as the chain of Hawaiian
Islands was formed on earth where it's
still forming on earth but then suddenly
there's something jolted the surface of
Mars and shifted it and the hot spot
ended up over underneath where Olympus
Mons eventually grew and more or less
stayed in that same place for the rest
of time until actually Mars ceased to
have any volcanoes at all so not only is
Olympus Mons the largest volcano on Mars
but was the last one to be erupting as
well we think it really is enormous
compare it to Mount Everest the tallest
mountain on the earth or to the Big
Island of Hawaii the Mauna Kea volcano
going from sea level in the case of
Mauna Kea all the way up to the peak
there neither of them are even half the
height of Olympus Mons nevermind the
area it's an absolutely enormous
creature and there we have a picture of
it if you placed it in the center of
France it would cover pretty much the
whole of the country of France there
it's absolutely enormous I just don't
think we can imagine the size of it
really if we look with the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter took a photograph
down into the crater of the top of
Olympus Mons the caldera here you can
see there's been a number of different
eruptions at different points bigger
ones and smaller ones but look at those
channels carved into the surface there
of the upper levels those have been cut
by water so once upon a time it rained
into the crater and then though the
rainwater cut channels and then it fell
down those enormous cliffs filling a
crater lake wouldn't have been an
amazing thing to have been able to see
but of course Mars has dried out now we
can look at this diagram it's a laser
altitude map in false-color showing us
the different heights of the different
regions so we've unfold
the entire surface two hemispheres of
Mars here and the deepest blue color is
8 kilometers below the average level and
then we come up through the blue into
the greens and the yellows which are
more or less the average level of the
surface what we would use a sea level
perhaps on on earth but we have to use
something as the reference point so we
use the average height here and then we
go up through the orange and to the red
colors of the Highlands and you can see
there the red and the pink of the
Tharsis plateau where those three
volcanoes that we looked at earlier are
lined up with their peaks going right up
to being white for the highest points
and olympus mons they're over to the top
left at around about the 10 o'clock
position on the clock face off to this
the left of the three that are on the
top of the plateau there now the deepest
hole in the ground the really deep blue
feature over on the bottom right there
is called the hello spacing and that's
an enormous impact feature giant space
rock crashed into Mars and punched an
enormous hole in the ground very much
like one of the moir on the moon
perhaps and it could well have been that
impact that shifted the whole surface of
Mars around and carried the the hotspot
to being underneath Olympus Mons the
other feature that's very prominent here
is the enormous gash in the ground that
runs roughly along the equator of Mars
on the left-hand side there
that's Valles Marineris the Grand Canyon
of Mars and it's enormous
it runs right from the top of the
Tharsis plateau where there are lots of
little box canyons they're all feeding
into it and then down and out towards
the right-hand side and if you laid a
diagram of that over the United States
it would run all the way from San
Francisco to New York
we're the American groaned Canyon over
there in the States is about the size of
one of those little side channels that
feeds into this thing it's enormous now
just imagine that if you were able to
use a time telescope to look back at
Mars and see it as it was perhaps three
billion years ago you would have seen
those volcanoes erupting you would have
seen rain clouds raining out water onto
the Tharsis plateau there a highland
regions running down those channels the
side channels carving them out and then
gushing down Valles Marineris and in the
enormous torrent carrying all the water
carving that enormous channel and
flowing back out through into the
lowland regions which are of course the
northern sea the northern ocean of Mars
we know this because if we look at the
impact craters which are mostly visible
on the right hand side on the yellow and
orange colored regions of the midrange
terrain on Mars there are loads and
those impact craters there that was land
and it's very old and there's not been
eroded to rub out all of those craters
or filled in in any other way so they've
accumulated over a very long period of
time if we look at the Tharsis region
where we have the volcanoes and the box
canyons a lot of erosion was happening
there a lot of it eruptions from the
volcanoes pouring out new material and
rubbing out older craters and then the
weather rain was carrying material along
with the water down into the canyon
creating a lot of silt and that would
have silted up any small craters there
as well and of course dumped a lot of
silt out into the sea and the sea the
northern light blue colored region
doesn't show any craters because that
would have been set silted up by all the
material being washed down Valles
Marineris
and dumped out into the the ocean there
the outflow region of Valles Marineris
you can see they braided river structure
carrying out through the into the the
northern ocean there and we can see the
short effect of the shoreline it's been
enhanced here with older and younger
shorelines
that where the we can see how the Seas
on Mars gradually receded as the planet
dried out and so once upon a time
something like this with one huge
continent at the bottom the southern
hemisphere and perhaps a ice cap
floating on the sea ice there on top of
the great northern ocean of the planet
Mars so why did it lose all the water
why did the Seas recede well Mars is a
little bit small it's half the size of
the earth and it would have lost its
heat out to space in the same way as the
smaller planets that we talked about
before and the moon and eventually the
volcanoes would stop erupting and the
core would solidify as it cooled down
now once the core solidifies you lose
your magnetic field it's the churning of
the liquid metal inside the earth that
causes us to have our magnetic field and
just like in Star Trek it's never a good
idea to have your shields down and so
Mars would have lost its shields lost
its magnetic field and then the solar
wind would tear into the atmosphere and
what happens is that the water molecules
the h2o gets stripped into H and O atoms
and the hydrogen being very light can
escape from the gravity of Mars which is
not that strong because it's a smaller
planet and it's able to escape to space
so all of the hydrogen atoms are whisked
away carried away by the solar wind and
the oxygen is left behind it's a bit
heavier and the oxygen reacts
with the iron compounds in the crust of
Mars and has created vast amounts of
iron oxide or rust which is why the
continents covered in that red dust the
red dust really is rust and so really
that's the whole story of the planet
Mars and just goes to show how important
the whole volcanic cycle and the
magnetic core of a planet can be to its
habitability now we're going to move on
out beyond us
don't you find asteroid belt and we find
the largest member of the asteroids
series we call it a dwarf planet now
because it's large enough for its
gravity to have pulled it into the most
economical shape a sphere and so it's a
950 kilometer diameter little baby
planet you can see a picture of it there
that was taken by the dawn spacecraft as
it approached showing a lot of slightly
soft looking craters and a couple of
strange white spots and down to the
right-hand side of the screen we've got
a picture of the earth the moon and
Ceres just to give you a sense of scale
Ceres really quite tiny even compared to
the moon there when as the Dawn
spacecraft zoomed in on theories it
gradually improved its resolution we've
got a color photograph here lots of
craters that look like traditional
impact craters and those weird white
spots again
so they organized a flyby very low pass
over the top of those white spots and
this is what the photograph showed it
looks like some material has been
bursting through the surface and making
these weird complicated patterns of
bright new material deposited on the
surface and it also looks like there are
lots of cracks in the ground and this is
right in the center remember of a large
crater that you could see here's a color
image of the same region and you can see
actually it's a mountain pointing
upwards conical shaped Mountain and this
is an ice volcano so it's a cryovolcano
a low-temperature volcano nobody
expected to find volcanoes on a small
asteroid like Ceres but here we have one
and here's a side-on view of another
they know that they discovered on the
surface of this little asteroid you see
lots of impact craters but clearly
there's a mountain made of ice that's
been erupting from beneath the surface
there and we don't know if these are
active today or not but they certainly
seem to be have been active in the
fairly recent past but otherwise again
that material would have been darkened
by the solar wind and it hasn't been so
what we think is happening with Ceres is
that there is a rocky core deep in the
center and then that is covered by a
mixture of water and ice and a warm
enough temperature for some of that
water to still be liquid and then the
outer crust is frozen ice with layers of
dust or other material mixed in with it
that's why the craters are rather
squidgy looking it's because they are
made of ice not rock and ice is that bit
softer and so the craters have that
rather soft appearance to them and it
looks like occasionally the surface gets
cracked or punctured and some of that
water then bursts forth out
and deposits minerals and salts and all
sorts of interesting chemicals onto the
surface now the big mystery here is why
is the water not frozen up as ice right
throughout this little dwarf planet why
is there some residual heat inside such
a small object and we really don't
understand that at all the second half
of this talk is going to take a look at
what's happening out in the outer part
of the solar system but for the moment
I'm going to bring this talk to a halt
and go and give my voice a little bit of
a rest and I'll see you for part two